---
layout: post
title:  "Command-line CSV processing"
date:   2017-01-24 4:14:30 -0500
categories: python
---

Some csv cleanup scripts grew into a little utility named kilgore.

It's basically a wrapper for some pandas functions. I probably should have just
done this with Jupyter notebook, but I've been doing so much shell scripting for
the Unix class I'm taking this semester, it just seemed quicker and more
universal. Or maybe it was just more fun.

Here's the repo:
[https://github.com/jakekara/kilgoretrout](https://github.com/jakekara/kilgoretrout)

#### Cleanup module registry

kilgore lets you drop columns or select specific ones, prettify column headers
(all lowercase, alpha-numeric and underscores), and limit the output to a number
of rows. I also added a registry module where you can write scripts specific to
your cleanup tasks, register them, and then call them with the "--load"
argument.

#### Other features

kilgore can also output JSON with the --json -- an array of rows, each represented by a
dictionary of column name and cell value pairs.

Finally, kilgore can be forced to load the data as strings, overriding pandas'
column type inference.

#### Example scripts

The demo folder in the repo contains raw data, clean data, and scripts to get
from raw to clean.

Here's a slightly modified snippet from absenteeism.sh, for cleaning up CT
schools asentee rate data.

{% highlight bash %}

    $ kilgore --skiprows 4 -i $FILENAME --pretty\
           --load clean_code_columns > clean/csv/$(basename $FILENAME).csv
	   
{% endhighlight %}
